Byron Sonne's Trial, Day 13 (Week 3) ====================================

[Notes taken by Alex]

Crown: 3am written subnmissions done, emailed written copies to Copeland and
Judge

J: This morning submissions on severability, and issues arising from ruling on
search warrant. 1hr 15min each.

Defense:

Propose to address issues on the search of the computers and explosives.

The doctrine on severability is interesting…

J: The other point, I don't know… Spoken to colleagues, I'm still troubled by
the position that you've taken… let's say I accept your proposition that the
bad parts can be severed out, does that mean that the good parts evaporate?
Having found that the warrant was sufficient in at least one of the main
charges, does it follow that the rest should be quashed?

D: This case has many issues with regards to search warrants… we're trying our
best.

J: I understand if it's a facial validity and it affects the underpinning.
But if it is completely sufficient with respect to one charge…

D: I'm struggling

J: In terms of severability, scientology, follow Johnson

D: Looking at it, what I understand in terms of first principles… Warrant is a
completed judiciary order. As I understand, only lawyers could attach so much
meaning to the difference between 'a' and 'the'. The test in Garafoli is
whether 'the' warrant could have issue, not whether 'a' warrant could have
issues.

I submit that that is what the ITO submits that 'the' warrant as issued,
otherwise you are amending the document.

J: Or are you… automatically into charter remedy for the parts that are bad.
The reality is there was some basis to support this warrant. Based on my
findings… conspiracy charge… would have come up during computer search.  I
hear what you're saying, but you're not aware of any cases that expressely
deal with this?  Hung up on remedies…

D: As I understand it, the warrant is not subject to applications or changes,
it falls on the four corners of the ITO.  My read of Garafoli is geared
towards whether that warrant is issued, could have issued…

J: The reality is the severability…

D: It is and it isn't… the crown was looking for amendment as opposed to
severability.  I agree severability is taking a black marker through the
warrant… in part, it would strike me that the issue of severability, is
perhaps best in this era considered as a factor under 24(2) analysis.

J: I do accept that it would make sense. (this is not part of any ruling), it
would make sense if there were some limits.  If you had a situation, if the
officer had made it overly broad deliberately, then it might be that there was
some basis to quash the whole thing,… but it would be an important factor in a
24(2) analsys.  There is a real question in post-charter.  I'm troubled by the
prospect that an otherwise partially valid warrant, issued by a justice, could
essentially evaporate, and all of the evidence excluded.  If the warrant's
quashed, we're still in 24(2). 

D: If the warrant's quashed, it may not be the worst… there's still the 24(2)…
Stepping back for a minute, part of the reason for the judicial order, is to
ensure the police are going in in a manner respecting the privacy, that has
clarity… if severance becomes the rule, as long as there's something good we
can carve out the bad… The incentive is to put everything in and hope for the
best.

J: I would imagine most warrants have more than one offense. I'm just
wondering what's happening in the real world.

D: I tried to provide as many cases as possible without inundating you

J: On other Garafoli, is it just assumed that there's a severance?  Can you
enlighten me on what's happening out there?

D: There's only room for counsel to find an argument that hasn't happened
recently… there's case law that supports the doctrine… if you agree that it's
a completed judicial order, I couldn't find any case where 'the' meant 'an
order' in Garafoli.  You are reviewing THE order that is before the court and
not just any order… an order could have issued under the following terms, and
what the search would have looked like.

J: I think one of the cases looks at what would have obtained.

D: Grabowksi and Patterson were wiretap cases, and prior to 1993 there was an
automatic exclusion, that the minute the authorization on a wiretap fell, they
were inadmissible.  That is a subject that lends itself that having found an
error… there would be automatic exclusion if you find the warrant is faulty…

Patterson… a wide basket clause, no evidence seized in relation to it, the
court said the clause sits as a distinct authorization within the larger auth,
it's safe just to sever it off.  Where it gets dicey is in a search warrant
case… in wiretap, you're searching for one item… in a search warrant, the
offenses need some correlation with the items listed, that adds complications.

Justice Fergusons's decision in Lee(?)… And see Jacobson as well.  What is
interesting is… these two decisions… both show a different view on the issue 
of severance.  In Lee, there's a warrant that lists one offense which can be
committed in two different ways. It's clear that the items that are being
sought are being sought cumulatively for that one offense.  Ferguson finds
that there were insufficient gronds for supporting both. There may have been
sufficient grounds to one means of committing that offense.  In paragraph 57,
she notes that… “the applicants concede that if there were no reasonable
grounds that the applications intentionally misreported that the former could
be severed from the latter”. Ferguson refuses to apply the severability
doctrine… in the ITO… offenses combined…

D: The test that is noted in paragraph 36 from Jolton and Franklin remains
unchanged, although there's been some concepts added… “severance will be
appropriate when there is a clear line between the good and the bad parts”.
Analysis of a search warrant within a search warrant. Labeled on top of each
other… how does the court on review tease out the good from the bad.  And
certain issues, Justice Ferguson, wasn't prepared to do that… it's clear she
wouldn't have decided it in that way.  There's an analogy… on the Jacobson
decision, the other Ferguson, looking at the Branton error, which exists on
the face of the warrant in this case, it may be that the Branton is answerable
in this case. Justice Ferguson and Jacobson dismisses the quashing, and notes
Jacobson and other wiretap cases.

J: You haven't referred to the Branton error… are you referring to that?

D: Let me deal with the Branton error…

I accept on the basis of the direction, you don't just look at the first page
of the warrant, but rather you read it as a whole.  So you read page one,
appendix A and B.  So looking at the first page in this case, it's clear that
the officer used a form that is 10 years out of date.  That on it's face may
well be the Branton error… but to answer that, if you look at the offenses
listed, they are listed as completed offenses…

J: I remember you pointing that out…

D: It'd be hard to backtrack on that now

J: It's interesting, I wasn't even aware of the Branton error…

D: Constable Warrick, and the other warrant, actually uses the new form.

J: They were trying to save paper… (laughter)

D: The new form is in use in other warrants.

J: You're not serious pressing the Branton error.

D: No.  The only issue is if the count 4 was not tied to a prior time frame as
the other 3 counts are.  That might make the Branton error apply to that.  A
conspiracy to commit the completed offenses 1 2 3, but if it is not time
limited, all of that ultimately is moot.  To an extent the Branton error is
there minimally.  But Branton is an interesting case… court of appeal doesn't
talk about severance, it's a straight quash of the warrant.

So I would call it a formidable application of it. So Ferguson in Jacobson,
says that Branton is wrongly decided or applied in Grabowsky, I'm not sure… we
can say it's wrongly decided, I don't think it's inconsistent with Grabowsky.
I think Branton can be answered but I don't think it's inconsistent with
Grabowsky.

At the end of the day, police officers are given direction to look for
evidence of a future offence, that does not fall in section (X) of the
criminal code, that's pretty substantial.

Ineffectually, Branton may be alive and well… The ITO in large measure is for
future offenses, I'm not sure if that gets us anywhere in terms of Branton. 

It's clear that Jacobson is an example of Branton error standing on its face
in that the wrong box was checked on a form and the form was out of date, and
there was no risk that officers were going in searching and seizing in
relation to future offenses.  It was a completed offense. They were only
looking for phone records. So the risk of misguiding the search was
nonexistent.  It's distinguishable on the facts…

You may well find that it's distinctual… In terms of the severability or the
application of, on our warrant, you have found that there's no evidence of
conspiracy. My friend conceded that the offense of mischief is a completed
offense, and is unsupported in the ITO. You found that there is evidence of
count 1 in relation to count 2… it's an odd count, even if there is sufficient
grounds to support the commission of that offense, none of the items being
sought provide evidence of the commission of that offense.  So in effect that
offense may not factor in.  The issue as I see it is if we need to consider,
severance… in Appendix A, list of items to be searched for: Items relating to
coconspirators, relates to the fourth count, conspiracy to commit… might
relate to the other counts? Not likely… considering that it's a conspiracy to
commit, some might argue that if you found… that evidence would also be
evidence of those offenses, not necessarily…

J: But then you'd have been into… it's headed “items relating to
co-conspiraters”. 

D: This is where the severance doctrine is interesting.  If you're going to
sever out several items, how would this search have happened under a warrant
that was properly issued, would they have bene looking at certain things:

J: I understand your point.  If that… hadn't been there… looking for records
relating to any of the offenses… if we're relating to severability… ie, one
offense is good, one is bad, the second count is a bit odd, it doesn't say go
look for the Flickr pictures, (D: they have them!)… we're always going to be
in a situation where we’re talking about evidence being seized in
severability… if that circumstance had happened.  Here it strikes me that the
items related to cocoonspires relates to the count I found to be bad… we're
talking about physical things like weapons and bolts and records… the rest I
found relates to the first charge, and it's pretty easy to sever. In a 24(2)
analysis should the crown be able to rely…

D: The courts seem to be reluctant to get into the reconstruction of what the
search would have looked like.

J: There was one case…evidence seized good part bad part.

D: In this case it is clear… “items to be used for the destruction of public
property”… is listed as

J: I found could be used as count 1…  using bolts in the future…

D: It also relates to an offense that has gone bad…

J: Mischief… if it's a completed offense… had there been evidence of prior use
of the bolts to scale the fence.

D: Maybe the last one is a clearer example… items related to the interruption
of communications. That is clearly a mischief count.

J: I found that that was part of count 1…

D: But if … found that it was part of both… the word of the mischief count…
the structure of the ITO struck me that that evidence was primarily towards
the mischief count.  Evidence counts towards both a good and bad count.
Severability ought not to apply… can't neatly divide it out… 

J: if you can't figure out the good and the bad, if it's both good and bad,
surely the good overrules the bad… In terms of the ultimate problem… if they
were able to take the wave guide under count 1, does it matter that they could
have also taken it under mischief?

D: I submit that that's a factor that is against applying severance but may be
a factor under 24(2). Case law… clear line between good and bad, then you can
sever.  The warrant is a warrant inside a warrant… overlapping…

The goal is to give clear direction to the officers, they're misled…

J: They're not misled, they're looking for two counts… everything that's left
relating to count 1.  If you couldn't… I guess it comes back to what do they
mean by clear line of demarcation.

D: Constable French breaks down how the items link to various items of
interest.  Under 'destruction' he talks about the disabling of cameras but
doesn't mention the wave guide.  Under 'communications' he specifically
mentions the wave guide. In this officers mind, he may have been linking the
wave guide not to the initial offense but to mischief.

J: I'd have to look at the ITO… he definitely talks about the wave guide that
could interfere with video cameras. Anyway, I understand your point.

D: If the items to be searched for are overlapping, they are not clearly
severable. And if they are, certain items need to come out on the standards
analysis, items related to conspirators,

J: I can understand the argument the items related to conspirators was taken
to be related to the other counts, but if we treat it thway its stated there…
that's that count I found was unsupported

D: The wave guide… your honor has made a finding… the count relates to a
threat to destroy property, under appendix A, the officers notes 'wave guide,
used for disruption used for disrupting communication', not as something to be
used for destroying property.  In the previous paragraph, for destruction, he
mentions items to be used under items to be used to destroy.

J: I understand… given the ITO… given my findings… the wave guide… If its
covered twice, once general once specific…

D: The warrant should given direction to cops, to know what they are searching
for … how are they to assess that any item can be used to destruct cameras and
make the connection between that and the wave guide, which is otherwise set
out in a separate thing…

J: You mean if the wave guide hadn't been mentioned specifically… that it
could be used to damage…

D: Anytime an officer adds 'that can be correlated' it's just to search a
particular area… The fact that the wave guide is dealt with separately
suggests that in this officers mind he did not contemplate the wave guide
being used to destroy property. In the ITO a paragraph suggests that a HERF could
be used…

J: If that's true… what would have happened in terms of severability… If the
wave guide could have been seized as an item for destruction.  If that's the
case, is it not still severable? In terms of cops going in and seizing things
and having to figure out

D: It may not be a strong issue on 24(2), they would have found that item…
keeping in mind that in addition… it's a conspiracy to commit the four offenses
that are listed… on some level that does, in terms of… it adds to a confusion
emanating on the face of the warrant. Necessitating exclusion per say, on the
24(2) analysis… 24(2) isn't undertaken piecemeal… knock-on effect, going back
to Grant… 1993… there the perimeter search was found to be unlawful but the…
supreme court found that the warrant was fine, it couldn't sever out the
conduct… and the process was tainted… a few weeks ago, back to Grant… a
series of charter violations can be important factor for exclusion.

I would ask the court to consider a clear and deliberate violation of Sonne's
rights… flawed search warrant in relation to the cottages… there's a lot more
than would fall on this simple error… there's more animated discussion at that
point. Grant 1993, it remains a reliable analysis …

J: I need to… talk about it at some point… if this were the only issue, hyou
wouldn't be advancing much of an argument of 24(2) quashing vs. severing.

D: There's a computer search…

J: You're asking me to reserve… if I were to accept your submissions you don't
want me to immediately go to a 24(2)…

D: If your honor finds that the same search would have been conducted under
the warrant that ought to have been issued… that that standing alone would
give me an uphill battle on any 24/(2) analysis.  Where it gets dicier though
is that even with severance, in this case, we still then get into a computer
issue, co-conspirators… fall out of the warrant, and there would still may or
may not be.

J: Is there am idle position where I can find that it can't be severed but I
can tease out the items that might be severed… 24(2) analysis.   You said… if
the same search had been conducted… at this point it means the items
co-conspirators…

D: That would end the search of computers… arguably, it would appear to me
that the computer seized under second warrant.

J: Crown says it wasn't seized under either warrant… this ruling would be
released…

D: Nature of the discussion… applying the severance…

J: Whether it's severable or not… it seems to me that it's simple enough to
say… what was seized pursuant to co-conspirators… and what was seized relating
to the first count… clearly the search… warrant that ought to have been, the
search would have been the same. Severable or not… that's the difference here.
If the whole warrant is quashed we're into  a 24(2) for everything. If not,
only for co-conspirators.  I'm talking just about this warrant. 

Bottom line is, apart from other violations, will it really matter?

D: The prior authorization needs to have some meaning… it is a method of
control… prior control over intrusions and to treat it lightly on some level
seems to go behind… if your honor finds…

J: I'm not suggesting that I would be treating it lightly. Nature of the
error… issuing justice… none of the excisions based on the conspiracy charge…
haven't found bad faith on the part of French… does the system get faulted
when the justice made an error?

D: That ought to be recognized… as a section 8 violation… it's important
enough… the officers are supposed to be given guidance… look for conspiracy…
can also be physical items…

J: Your argument leads that anytime a warrant is overly broad… it would have
to be quashed.  Shouldn't be able to sever it out if there was evidence seized
under a bad offense.

D: It does lead to that.  It seems to be an animated feature… it would
probably come up with a hypothetical… tease out the good from the bad… on this
one, it's all overlapping on some level, it might not be a palatable outcome…
quashing the warrant… Severance was born of an era trying to avoid the harsh
impact of finding a quashing.  Now it is an issue that can be dealt with under
(24)2

If I can just briefly address the second warrant: As an example, the
explosives offenses are added, no suggestion that they relate to the other
charges, second warrant different conditions might apply… distinct charges…
context is different. 

On the issue of the computer search on second warrant, only mention that computer
may contain evidence in relation to explosives is in the ITO page 5, under
'grounds to believe that the items seized will afford evidence of the
offenses', and in paragraph 4, there is the notation 'the chemical books,
computers, passes, and wave gun, are items that have been used in sonne's
operation of making chemicals'.  That's the only reference… under subheading
a, under items relating to explosive substances, it lists “computers”.

All you have is a statement that the copmuters have been used by Sonne to make
chemicals. You can't even tell if the computers have been used to make
chemicals or if they've been used to post pictures.  Clearly the passes or
wave gun didn't get used to make chemicals…

J: There was some evidence of the computer being used to forge passes… because
of the tweet… but there's nothing in the ITO that suggests how the computers
would have been used for chemicals.  The officers had to have some evidence
that the computers had been used… it wasn't an attempt to seize them, but an
effort to look for records related…

D: They don't need to know, they just have to have grounds… this officer has
no basis… he may have articulated some theoretical basis… we know from Morelli
how computer is an inherently protected place… just to get into the
computers… the mere assertion… it seems too far removed… If this officer had
opined that speaking with bomb squad… some suggestion that there's a computer
used… at least something…

J: Is it your position that computers can be severed out?

D: Yes, the warrant should fall, but should this more readily get the
severance? Maybe… I'm happier to have the warrant fall… I don't see the search
being justified on what's left in that second warrant.

J: Crown, you want to start now?

C: On severability issue, obviously my friend… crown's position is clear… 
di Luca's position has a thread of logic through it… more compelling argument in
pre-charter days when it was all or nothing… the law could well have gone that
way. The reality is the law did not go that way.  Charter with us for 30
years now. Severability is alive and well… as a means of saving a warrant from
a breach. Severability is not activated at the remedy stage… that is the law.

J: What do you say about the concern I raised about the warrant couldn't be
severed… there's still a good part… there isn't a decision that counsel
provided… talks about any basis that the warrant… the fact that there is a
good part… can't be severed… maybe that is how severability has been
developed.  Is it automatic that it's severable or not?

C: My response is that it all turns out what you mean by … in a situation where
… what we're talking about in warrant each term in one document is an
authorization to do something. That's the key assumption. You run into a
situation where two terms are so intertwined that you can't remove one and
leave the other.  You'd have an order that made no sense or one that
authorized something that was wrong.

J: Look at the face of the warrant and see that it still works.

C: If some is still good and the good can stand on its own, then you don't
have the link problem… it is a problem of what are two separate terms…

J: In a situation where evidence is seized in a good part and bad part.

C: Lets talk about what the warrant authorizes you to do… in this case, my
friend has argued in terms of items that can't be removed from the warrant
because it's linked… I submit that because of the appendix… removing from the
document not having any effect… What happens when you have separate terms that
seem to authorize the seizure of the same item, and you say this offense is no
good, so you can't take that cup, but you do authorize it…

J: The wave guide… di Luca's argument saying it doesn't apply…

C: What you have are two terms that authorize the seizure of the wave guide.
Since you have a redundancy, you can't consider that a problem… here's the
example… a house that has two power sources, one is normal power, and the
other is a generator… you've got two things that do the same thing, light your
house, but would anyone say because you've got those two doing the same, that
they are so linked you couldn't separate them? You can detach hydro and go on
the generator… or I can remove the generator.

Same issue here.  If you have two seizure terms, one is which related… there
is no problem. If cops gointoaa house thinking they have authority on two and
later find they had only one, what difference does it make. It's a redundancy.

J: Going to have to read the Ferguson decision…

C: This took six hours of my time…

J: Ferguson goes on… concession that one of the modes … good modes or bad
modes…

C: (arguing about Ferguson, knocks out the offense, blah blah blah)

C: To the extent that you have redundancy you have no problem… cops going
into a home thinking he's got two basis, in fact he only has one, doesn't
matter.

I submit that the whole effect of Garafoli… the whole effect… to reviewing the
search warrant… the point is that Garafoli is about a rejection of formalism…
making a warrant that has 10 good terms and 1 bad term fall for that reason
alone… would be to embrace formalism… there's nothing improper with removing
terms, it's the same warrant…

J: well, if the search is much broader than it would have nbeen or or ought to
have been… a search for records would be quite invasive in a case like this…

C: but that's a manner of search issue, not a facial validity issue. I'm not
saying that severance cures all problems… there may be problems… but that's
not an issue of severance.

J: If I were to reach the conclusion that I couldn't sever… and the warrant
falls… what would happen? I guess that's ….

C: if court were to come… I think the only way the entire would fall… you
would have to find that the conspiracy is so linked to every other term that
it has to fall. If the conspiracy is not intertwined that it can't be undone,
to drop the entire warrant could only be done if the court chose to ignore
severability.

J: My understanding under Garafoli, one offense was supported… couldn't sever…
whole warrant fails… 'the' vs 'a' warrant… if that were the case, I wonder why
this wouldn't come up a lot more.

C: Exactly, we don't see this every day …

J: Maybe everyone is severing…

C: I don't do it… you've got a presumed valid order… 10 of these terms are
fine, but term number 11 is a problem… intuitively, the fact that the 11th
term brighs down the entire warrant, it doesn't make sense

J: Computers…

C: There's no discretion not to apply severance.

J: I'm going to look at the question of severance… I'm troubled that if there's
no severance, what would happen if… does mean… there was no section 8
violation… unless the whole warrant is bad.

C: In order for… intertwined with every other term…

J: In that case I couldn't sever.

C: You'd have a one-term warrant… breaks it up on paper… remove one component,
nothing remains… but that's not what we're dealing with.

J: No, but that's a different view of severability…

(morning recess).

J: What would work out best… restart this when I come back from my trip…
Tuesday after Family Day, we're not going to get it in before I go…  (21st or
something of February)… going to Antarctica…

C: I'm going on a ski vacation March 15th…

C: Branton error thing… reluctant to address it… there are only two cases
which address it… I don't think I need to worry too much… Branton can not be
right on this issue… my point is… Branton doesn't apply to every warrant… We
don't need to worry… In this case, we look at the entire warrant, the problem
does not exist.  The clarity of which the offenses are… Overbreadth of
potential search… concern about perverse incentives… the reality is when you
look at the facts on the ground, this issue almost never comes up… I've had
this issue mentioned once before… this is not…

J: Where are all the other cases like this one where there's a Garafoli search
warrant… That doesn't arise?

C: That doesn't come up. The offenses are unique and new.  It's not something
easy, like murder of assault or robbery.

J: Mischief…

C: Let me amend… Some of the offenses… intimidation… this is largely a
function of unusual circumstances… the facts weren't as cut and dry… this
required more thought and implications… more room for circumstantial
reasoning…

J: I don't know at what point officers…

C: It's unusual circumstances…  This issue of the actual offenses is not an
issue I've ever encountered.

J: You mean where some are good and some are bad.

C: We don't have to worry about an epidemic of overbroad warrants because the
police think the crown can rely on severability…  In terms of the argument
that my friend made in terms of severability… I don't have any futher
submissions.

Two other issues

First one: …

J: … I do recall… timing reasons… something or other… mumble mumble…

C: I guess… it's still valid… the ITO for the first warrant is included in the
second warrant.  It's a fair point that in second warrant, whats evidence you're
looking for… it's a fair observation that there doesn't appear to be one.

J: Given the decisions, in the ITO, I wasn't too critical of the officer…
these pictures were cops in uniforms… on duty… How does that provoke a state
of fear from the general public?  There might be an argument by extending
that… the general public…  I was able to sort that out on the first count…
wasn't so sure on the second… I think she could win an award for longest mumble
right now… if I take the view on severability…

C: If you accept Mr di Luca's argument… I've agreed that mischief is out, the
whole house of cards falls down… there's not a request to deal with evidence
that only applies or only applies to that… nothing!

J: It didn't cause any additional…

C: The question becomes… to the extent that the officer was trying to be
comprehensive in articulating the offenses… can the count be sustained, and I
think the answer is yes.  I would invoke the very reasons in in paragraph 148
page 38… it is the same issue.  Your honour says “given the height of the
security around the G20, public being threatened by pulling down fences,
taking photos of cops with caption “bacon at work” and “bacon on wheels”, this
could be intended to provoke a state of fear”…

In the same way that suggesting to the world that you're willing or able to
dismantle the key security apparatus (the fence), making the statement that I
have people keeping you safe (cops) will have the same effect… threshold of
fear… a state of fear of some degree. It applies if you have the people
that keep everyone safe under surveillance.  You're targeting them. If you
disagree with that, we cut it out, and the rest of it stands(?)

There can be no link…

The computer thing, in relation to the June 23rd ITO.  We're talking about
records on the computer… that in fact is what he in appendix A is what he
wants to search for, items related to the production of explosive substances.
Records relating to the production of explosives. Contained through files,
books, reports, notes, applications, etc… which can be stored
electronically or on paper.

What you have there are types of documents and two potential modes of storage.

The question you put ot my friend is “is it not the case that the only
reference in the ITO is found on page 5, the 'chemical books', isn't there
anything else there”.  And I agree there isn't anything directely…

But it goes back to Para 5 page 4, it deals with the HTMD… when you get to the
bottom, it talks about “in addition to the items mentioned, it also located
lab equipment for making explosives, beakers, containers, pyrite,
electrolysis…”

J: They located those things, but I do not confirm they were used to make
explosives.

C: We have a guy who has in his home the chemicals to make, he has a
laboratory, and he has books/etc.  So we have all of that…

J: What I said about that… related books was related to chemical books, (not
explosives)

C: So what you have is the books related to the lab, and the lab is related to
the chemicals.  I submit that once you take that… that there's a reasonable
basis to believe that they are connected to these chemicals.  Once you accept
that and you go back to the June 22 ideal about his extensive use of
computers, and that he uses computers to advance whatever plan or agenda he's
got… and it appears that through his computer postings, he likes to build and
tinker, and likes to chronicle…

J: We have to be careful there… I didn't put everything in under chronicle…

C: But even if you take what you amplified… even things as simple as showing
the boards where he blew items through the boards… he's a person who likes to
use the computer… he used it to do many things in his life. He's someone
who's savvy with computers…  He's got books that are connected to his lab…
and his use of computers in his hobby in taking things apart, it is a
reasonable believe that Mr Sonne would not turn his back on the internet in
pursuing his interests in how you make things and put things together and
modify them. 

I think on the basis of the big picture, it would be unreasonable for someone
to say there is no basis wouldn't have availed himself of this treasure
trove of information (computer) and would resort only to books and documents.
The reasonable of that belief that he'd have used his computer… to assist him…
that is a reasonable belief.  Even through French talks about computers on
Page 5, what we're talking about is computer records.  If he uses computers
are much as we know he does, and he's got books and documents, which are
connected to the lab, we have sufficient basis to search that computer for
documentation of any variety… instructional, his thoughts, his emails, you
have a reasonable basis to go through that computer.

J: (Something about explosives…)

C: In terms of, is there a problem with the search term? Is it unjustified?
No, there isn't. One does have to follow a chain of circumstancial reasoning,
but it is a valid chain.  There is a basis to reasonably follow that chain of
reason, on the amplified record.  Subject to your questions, we don't have
anything more to say. 

D: The chain of reasoning that my friend provided the court… should have been
evidence in the ITO… the officer states a conclusion and doesn't connect it.
It needs to be on a good faith baiss… on a mior technical manner… the minute
you have… today's day and age, anyone who demonistrates computer savvy and you
go on a search warrant does it mean you can go on their computer.s

We know from Mirelli that getting into a computer… searching the records…
privacy issues.

J: On one extreme… you couldn't search the computer… they know there are
computers… and books related to chemicals…  There's no evidence of actual… use
of the computer for the purpose in the ITO.

D: An apart from the assertion there would be evidence.

J: I guess the question is… how far can you draw inference from.

D: French didn't bother to explain his thought process… what we have in the
ITO is just a bald assertion on his part.  On the issue of severance… The second
count may actually provide a clearer example of a count that can be svered
from an ITO.  It falls within the classic Grabowski scenario.  You look at it,
there's no evidence supporting it.  If it comes out that it can be nearly
svered out… it does highlight the difficulty with the other counts that they
are all overlapping… add in conspirancy, Branton error… justice hill calls it
the Branton Error…

He didn't take the view that this is an arcane throwback or that you shouldn't
NOT quash a warrant because of the error… he says it's not a case for
severability… he doesn't describe why…

J: I'm troubled when a court I'm bound by decides something without referring
to it… one would have expected severability to be raised.

D: I don't think Branton stands for the position that every overarching thing
kills the warrant…

J: Is there any reason why… Branton should have considered severability? It
suggests to me that counsel got the ruling by surprise… or didn't think…

D: I don't know, I don't have… it might have answered your question… In Branton
the errors were multiple, there was a huge overseizure… this was back when you
could borrow radio signals from the US without subscribing… could the CRTC
only require people to subscribe to a Canadian signal… they shut down his
business by seizing everything in the business…  was it even an offense… I
accept that it may be a bit of a throwaway, but it still stands to reason on
the issue of prospective offenses, section 48 you can't get warrants on
offenses that aren't offenses… a warrant needs to guide the officers… they're
going to have some knowledge of what they are to look for… items related to
prospective offensies… they are out side the terms of the warrant.

There is that odd conspiracy count #4 here, is it a completed? You found there
was no evidence.  Is it a completed conspiracy to commit the offense, or
future offense? We don't know. It's poorly drafted.  That's kind of the
thinking around the Branton error. 

Last point… there are six offenses listed on the ITO, nominally 4,… 3 offenses
plus 3 to conspiracy to commit… one out of six offenses remains. There are
four categories of evidence listed… arguably two remain.  Multipling 1/6 by
1/2 gives you 1/12, apparently the good in this warrant is about 8.3%.  The bad
would be 91.7% give or take.  This shows there's a discretion for an issuing
judge… whether we're severing out so much of the warrant… 8%? What is left?
Are you getting into the issues where the issuing judge's discretion to issue
the warrant is engadged? He has the authority to say 'this isn't good enough'

J: I'm not here to do an appeal

D: No no, no judge COULD have… severance HERE is discretionary, they're not
obligated to sever… and certainly on some level you're guided… not
circumvented… you'e netting out so much through sever that it is a different
search… and then discretion should apply.  I submit that the good and bad
overlap significantly.

J: The argument that Byrne makes is that there is an overlap… mumble mumble…
If you're looking at can you take scissors and cut out portions and cut out
portions and still have a good warrant… yes.  In this warrant, can you look at
what they got… yes…   That one is a complete overlap… so they could have
gotten the wave guide under one or the other… in terms of the policy… we don't
want to encourage the police to prepare overly broad warrants… the officer I
found had a … mumble mumble… he didn't investigate it properly… the conspiracy
count falls not because of… the failure of the officer… I don't have a sense
from the evidence overall that it was just thrown in to do a broader search.
You could have said because of the tweets… the idea was to get the computer…
it wasn't even… didn't try to get an order to seize the computer.

D: It does start to cross the line… from it wasn't perfect… at a certain point
it really starts to circumvent the purpose of authorization… severance doesn't
come up that often.

J: Except on taking that to the next level… the issuing justice wasn't tricked
on giving a warrant on conspiracy… if 'm look at why are we here on that
count, the officer didn't address the conspiracy…

D: even on the 24(2) analysis… assume there's no insition… ought not to have
issued… that's a serious breach… it may not be the PO's fault… didn't hold the
justice's hand… but it's still a failure of the system… justice stands as a
check and balance on the police search.

J: I'm not trying to minimize the issue in terms of overbroad… it is relevant
that that isn't what happened here… if the officer had put in a whole bunch of
stuff to support… tweets coming back, agreement to pull down the fences, and
that was made up, the justice would not be aware of that… from her
perspective, that would be a whole other case… it doesn't mean that if there's
no bad faith, but the overbroad is issued… the system failed… that means that
the end.

D: That discussion is appropriate within 24(2) and severance.

J: As Mr. Byrne said, there's post-charter cases… it's an interesting issue…

D: There's not a whole lot of case law… this could be under 24(2)… old-school
but novel once again.

J: It's not the first time I've been told it's an issue… I'm going to reserve
this decision… my plans is to have everything done by… judging from… mumble
mumble… written decisions done…

D: I will make an overarching submission… knock-on effect: everything should
go, and alternative submission for all of the evidence seized, some of the
evidence, the computer, the statements…

J: I'll be in a position to give you all the written decisions… when trial
resumes… full week, I'll have to work through things enough as I did for the
search warrant issue…

C: It's fair to say we won't be starting the trial next week…

J: No matter what I do the trial …

C: Mumble mumble…

J: I would have thought…

C: It's going to make a difference…

J: I appreciate that… if I exclude the explosives…

C: We're going to want that… it would be a short trial…

J: That's one way to get us back on schedule…

C: Mumble… (laughter)

J: Probably set aside four weeks… so there's no issue…

(lunch break)

(Looks like we'll be looking at photo evidence here… an officer is on the
witness stand, monitors and projectors are hooked up in the courtroom.  The
first photo is one of byron's home office, visibie are a mac laptop, a bunch
of wires, an external CD rom drive, a large tube labeled “Extended Range Wifi”
(essentially a pringles can-style wifi antenna) a cheap ikea lamp, a second
monitor, a map of the world, a bookshelf full of books 

J: The submissions I received from Mr Copeland and Mr Byrns going in the
court file. Ready to start on computers.

C: We are ready.  Blah blahblah, IT guys on site, we are ready. The first
witness will be detective constable Maniquis.

(sworn in)

Alvin Maniquis Badge #8307

C: Been with TPS since 2001?

A: Yes

C: With Asian organized crime task force in 2010?

A: Yes

C: Still with?

A: Yes

C: Describe duties

A: Investigator, search warrants, investigative duties…

C: On June 22, 2010… became involved with investigation?

A: Yes

C: How?

A: on that day at 10:45pm I attended 13 division with detective (?) in regards to a
G20 arrest. Told it was Sonne, there was an address, search warrant was
executed. 

C: Officer in charge?

A: Tam Bui…

C: As “C” manager what was your job

A: To oversee the search team to ensure the items seized.

C: If I was an officer and I found something that might be of interest?

A: Notify me, I make the decision to seize it… step up and see what's
necessary

C: Your role is different from the … exhibit officer… he records everything…

A: Yes

C: Prior to arriving did you have futher involving / know more?

A: Before, early morning 23rd I conducted my own open online search for
torontogoat/Byron Sonne to see what I cound find. I found some G20 things on
YouTube, Twitter, a blog… I made a small report and tried to capture the
pictures onto the report… I made a report

C: what did you do with it?

A: I completed it and submitted it to our file managent system MCS(?)

C: At some point a second warrant was obtained, you attended?

A: On the 23rd I attended at 9am… the scene was contained wit hthe G20 mobile
support team, officers in uniform, and they had the address secure.  There was
a crime scene log Waited to get authorization

C: How long ?

A: A few hours… I spoke with FIS crew along with sergeant in charge, gave a
quick breakdown on open source web,

C: why?

A: It's easier if people going in to search have background of what they're
going into, so they conduct themselves when inside.  The knowledge from the
internet would help then understand what needed to be searched.

C: What other information did you have?

A: I had the appendix… around 1, Chong had the warrant and the appendix, and
we all had a briefing… read over the appendix… that's pretty much it.  Shortly
after, attended the garage, executed.

C: Number of computers and related were seized?

A: Yes

C: do you know how many?

A: I remember two computers in the office… I can't give an exact number.

C: We have a screen… … (talk about computer screen setup… password screen
timed out, have to call in another guy to type his password).

C: We're looking at a photo right now…

A: It's the office area inside the house.

C: Is that taken the day of the search?

A: Yes

C: Next photo… wait, can I daraw your attention to the bulletin board?

A: Yes

C: Is that how it looked?

A: Yes

C: Items were seized from the desk and the bulletin board?

A: Yes

C: (photo of bulletin board) tell us what we're looking at

A: It's the bulletin board

C: What are the two white papers on the bottom left?

A: A picture of the G20 fence line, and city streets, etc.

(entered into evidence as 13 A)

C: With respect to the computers there… whose decision was it to seize?

A: Mine

C: Why?

A: In relation to the charges, production of explosives, mischief, I felt that
the computers were the gateway for all the blogs and social media, digital
photography, video on YouTube, that had to be uploaded took place on these
computers.  I felt that these computers need to be seen so we can extract that

C: What did you know about Mr Sonne before you searched his home

A: Extensive background of computers, digital field, blogs, he was highly
regarded on hacker blogs, Hacker News, if you were recognized on there you're
tech savvy… I thought his things that we found came from these computers in
sonny's house.

C: did you make efforts to search the computers onsite?:

A: No, once I was aware, we didn't search on-scene, no-one including myself
were qualified to do that kind of search on a computer, plus we didn't want to
risk losing information by trying to login. In my experience, people put fail
safes, password locks, software that can wipe a whole hard drive, if we were
trying to enter stuff, or unplugging from the wall, so I called detective
Papizewski from IT… called our adviser that we did frind some computers, she
would send her own guys to seize them.

C: Did anyone arrive?

A: They did the following day, we kept the scene until we completed the full
rendering of the scene using FIS, and 3D machine, and video and photos before
we touched anything, and no one from my search team physically touched
anything, didn't want to lose evidence of booby trapped…

C: Were they unplugged?

A: No, I didn't touch anything, and I don't think the other officers tampered
with it… I gave them a briefing on booby traps…

C: It was your decision to seize?

A: I just felt that on the appendix it said to seize the computers and storage
devices, in relation topexploexis… I felt that computers can have a lot of
information… I think it would be very large or cumbersome… internet accessed
through computer 

C: Given your knowledge of the search did you come across books about
explosives?

A: There was a book… can't remember… a few books science or physics related,
it was on the back shelf, can't remember.

C: No more questions.

Copeland crosses.

D: Can I ask you what materials you have reviewed in relation to this case
before coming today?

A: Social media report, my notes, Something… search warrant.

D: You became involved at 9:45pm on June 22nd

A: Yes

D: From Bui?

A: Yes

D: He advised to attend 13 division?

A: Yes

D: You had no involvement in the execution of the first search warrant? From
June 22?

A: No

D: You were delegated as senior (?)?

A: Yes

D: Initial responsibility?

A: Yes

D: Agree with me… number of issues you were concerned about? The security of
premises?

A: Yes

D: Ensure there is control over who goes in or out?

A: Yes

D: You mentioned a crime scene law of (?)

A: Yes

D: Security matters… agree with me that the integrity is of importance?

A: Yes

D: You want to know if anything gets moved?  A: Yes

D: The evidentiary value of something may depend on where it is?

A: Yes

D: As crime scene manager, you were the onsite supervisor for second warrant?

A: Yes

D: When warrant was granted on 23rd, it was delivered by Shawn?

A: Yes

D: Personally

A: Yes

D: Did you review it?

A: Yes

D: In terms of what you received, there's an order: warrant plus appendix A
and B, there's also information to obtain? Did you receive the information to
obtain? Or just the order?

A: The order and A and B.

D: (asks for a document from the registrar), volume 1 of application record.

Volume 1, Tab 7A. Take a moment to look at that and ask me what you recognize.
First few pages.

A: This is the first warrant dated June 22nd.

D: Let's go to tab B. Same question. Recognize that?

A: First page, yes. Appendix A and B, yes.

D: First 5 pages, yes?

A: Yes.

D: So it's only the first 5 pages that were delivered to you?

J: Referring now to… a page within…

D: We can start at the beginning of Tab B. There's a document titled Warrant
to Search, an exhibit something d'andra, you've seen the first page…

A: Yes

D: now the second page may be out of order… 'Information to obtain the search
warrant'? Did you receive this?

A: No, I received appendix A and B.

D: The third page is appendix A, the list of items to be searched for?

A: Yes

D: The 5th page is the offenses, appendix B, in relation to the search.

A: Correct.

D: In your role as supervisor for the execution, it's an important thing for
you to understand the terms of the warrant?

A: Yes

D: It's also important to ensure your team understands?

A: Yes

D: It's fair to say that you reviewed this document carefully?

A: Yes, and my whole team read it

D: I want to ask you… a couple questions about your understanding. May not be
relevant to section 8, but may be relevant to 24(2).

Starting page 1, search warrant… signed by a judge… justice marshall… starts
off with the recitals… (reads from warrant) at 58 Elderwood drive… certain
things, namely, reference to appdix A… suspected, intended, commission of
offence, see list of offences.

You understand that the next part is the actual order?

A: Yes

D: Therefore this is to authorize and require you between 11:15am today and
9pm June 27 to enter into the premises and to search for and seize the above
things, and to bring them before me or some other justice to be dealt with.

A: Yes.

D; That's what you were authorized and required to do.  And there is a time
limitation on the face, and there is an address that you are authorized to
enter into.

A: Right.

D: You can't go in and search at a different time. And you can't search a
different place.

A: Right.

D: Turn to Appendix A. Under the heading 'items relating to co-conspirators':
There's some language in the first records authorized to be searched for and
seized… records of the names and phones numbers of dealers, whether associates
or friends, stored on storage records, (lists types of records).

A: Yes 

D: That's one of the items that you reviewed. At the time you executed
the search, what did you understand the term “dealers”

A: Businesses, or… who can supply certain products… anything… anyone can
supply what can be made… what we were looking for explosive devices…

D: Your understanding of 'dealers' has to do with transaction in commercial
context…

A: Or personal…

D: So… did you understand that 'dealers' posed a restriction? Couldn't be just
any old records…

A: It would be… (?)

D: In your experience… many search warrants?

A: Correct

D: How many?

A: 20, more or less

D: Is it your understanding… is there a relationship between the items to be
searched for and the offenses that are in Appendix B?

A: Yes

D: Can't search for any old records… have to search relating to the offenses.

A: Yes.

D: At least to seize it.

A: Yes

D: Now, there's a reference in the first clause to magnetic data storage
units, phones, etc… what did you understand this to mean? In terms of your
authority to deal with computers, cell phones, etc.

A: When It comes to cmoputers, EM data storage… it's our practice that we
seize that and deliver it to our computer guys to examine it and take what is
necessary.

D: Maybe a step ahead… let me focus in.  Was it your understanding that it
authorized to search for computers and to seize computers.

A: Yes

D: It was your belief that you had authority to seize a computer.

A: Reading the whole thing yes.

D: Would you agree with me that the first word of that clause is… lets first
clause… is 'Records of the names and phone numbers'… it seems to be
authorizing a search for records for phone and name of a certain class and
person.

A: (mumbles)? Not sure what you are asking

D: The suggestion is that the clause mentions records of names and phone
numbers of dealers as the item to be searched for and the thing ot be seized.
And then there's a list of different media on which those records might exist.
That you could search through. That's my question. Was it your understanding
that you could seize the computers under the warrant itself.

A: Not just that clause, the whole clause, the whole appendix, after reading
it. I believe I could search for it, seize the computers, the electronic
devise.

D: Help me ID the parts of appendix A that said you could seize a computer.

A: The bottom paragraph… “Records that relate to the production of explosives…
information which can be stored electronically or on paper.”.

D: You agree with me that that clause begins with the word “Records”… in
relation to the production of explosives

A: right.

D: And then there's a description of explosives… that are retained… You didn't
understand this to mean that you could search for records, you understood it
to mean you could search for computers.

A: To me the computer has the record on it, the best way to extract evidence
without losing it is to seize the computer.

D: Without looking at the contents of the computer, how do dyou know it's
there?

A: Through my earlier open source researching, social media report, there is
over 200 digital photos uploaded to Flickr (describes Flickr). You can only do
this with a computer… knowing that digital aspect of how they showed up, and
YouTube video was uploaded, to me those devices were the ones used to author
those photos… for the whole world to see.

D: Did you have any information whether those blogs/social media had been
updated and maintained by a computer within the address of 58 elderwood.

A: No.

D: Would you agree that you really thought was that the records MIGHT be on
the computers?

A: Possible.

D: Possible. You wanted to be thorough…

A: Yes.

D: You didn't want to leave anything behind that might contain?

A: Yes

D: You didn't just seize one, you seized a number?

A: Yes

D: External hard drives? Thumb drives?

A: Yes, Yes

D: Electronics, and electromagnetic data storage units.

A: Yes

D: And before you authorized it, you had no idea of the contents.

A: No. No idea.

D: Before moving on from appendix A would you agree there were a number of
books. 

A: Yes

D: Books are one thing that are mentioned in the last clause.  But you
certainly didn't seize every book. You didn't grab bookshelves and take htem
out of the residence and review the contents later?

A: No, during the search I instructed the team to search through the books to
see for paper inside, they can be hollowed out, hidden cameras in the books,
hard drives, asked them to flip through, and leave the ones unrelated, like
philosophy and poems

D: You did seize 'Understanding Physics'?

A: Yes

D: Chemistry?

A: There were some kind of scientific books.

D: None had the word 'explosives'?

A: Can't recall

D: Something to do with science, and that's why they were of interest?

A: Yes

D: Might have contained information relevant to explosives?

A: Some devices I saw on the blogs… you't get how they wor k through some
kind of science book.

D: Were the books… seized because they might explain how devices worked, like
the wave guide?

A: To me the information might have been used to construct.

D: Those books… did the seizing have anything to do with this clause relating
to records of explosives.

A: Yes.

D: You mentioned the crime scene log… do you have copy?

A: No

D: I'm going to show you a document… 'major crime scene log', you recognize
this?

A: Yes

D: (confirms location and date, start time, Bui's name, does he recognize it?)

A: (flips through document)

D: Start time is in the evening on June 22?

A: Yes

D: There are columns at the top… (talk about the document some more) reason
for the entries… First 8 entires are for the CBRN team? No times recorded?

A: No

D: Did you have a hand?

A: No, I attended 23rd at 9am.

D: Had time to review?

A: Yes

D: Find the earliest time recorded on this log.

A: June 22nd…

D: may be some things that are back-filled.

A: 10/06/22-23, 22:00 hours.

D: Someone goes in, PC mailer, badge number, the reason for entry is intel?

A: Yes

D: Time in is 10pm?

A: Yes

D: Time out is 00:53?

A: Yes

D: First entry with time recorded?

A: Yes

D: No times recorded for other team?

A: No.

D: Next time is sergeant meamey?

A: Yes

D: Look at bottom of page 2, a backfilled entry.

A: Yes

D: There are two FIS officers, a late entry… and you wanted to record that
information…

A: It wasn't ME recording it.

D: But it's consistent with practice that you include times prior to the start
of the log?

A: On my scenes I keep the person with the log in once place.  We made one
point of entry for the house which was the garage.

D: The earliest time of entry is 7:25PM on June 22nd.

A: Entry meaning the scene not the house.

D: you understood that some had entered in the first search warrant? None of
that is reported in your log?

A: I don't…

D: You don't know the times they went in?

A: I can't answer that

D: As you're arriving June 22nd, there's potential the scene had been
disturbed?

A: I arrived on 23rd at 9am, I had no reason to believe - the doors were
sealed, contained with uniformed officers.

D: you have no personal knowledge in terms of the search of June 22nd? No
knowledge if anything might have been moved?

A: No, No

D: No attempt to find out the answers?

A: Never occurred to me.

J: Is there to be some kind of continuity issue?

D: Not sure…

C: I wasn't sure the computers would be a concern….

J: We have the officers here…

…

C: I'm not sure how this is relevant.

J: Not sure… it may be relevant… (not clear)

D: Let me ask my next question:

D: Officer did you have any information whether anyone had attempted to access
the computers in the first search warrant? Did you make any inquiries?

A: No, No

D: Thank you. You mentioned before you attended the scnee you did some
research, some social media sites?

A: Yes, yes

D: One think you mentioned… was part of your grounds for seizing the
computers… something from Hacker News?

A: It helped me get a better understanding of the complexity when it comes to
the computers

D: You recall making reference to Hacker News? You said something about the
fact that Sonne was well regarded… made you feel he had some abilities?

A: Yes

D: To be clear, as you we redoing research, after midnight, one of the sites
you went to was Hacker News.com, do you recall that?

A: Yes

D: Do you recall what the details of the information on Hackernews site that
caused you to believe he was well regarded?

A: There was some stuff in regard to the G20… the photos on Flickr linked
back… nexus of connecting.  On the blogs I rmemeber some people praising him
for great photos, thanking him, this just from typing in google search for
'toronto goat'. On the internet it will bring up stuff from last year, today…
I can't remember which page…

D: You mentioned these links between various sites… I take it the social
media report you prepared… would have contained all relevant info that you
found during your search?

A: Yes I did screencaptures on as many photos… onto a word doc.

D: You recall whether you retained anything from Hacker News?

A: Not on that website… can't right-click to save, so I tried saving what I
could.

D: I'm going to suggest that Hacker News was not in any way linked to Flickr or
torontogoat, and that all that was there was a video newsreel. Would that
assist in refreshing?

A: It's a big website, I remember seeing the name 'toronto goat' mentioned…

D: I'm going to read you something from Hacker News.  I'm going to ask if this
refreshes your memory.

J: Has this been disclosed?

D: No, but I have good faith

J: Show it to the crown.

D: There's a video, and what I have is a transcript of the video…

J: At this point you're not setting up for…

D: I want to put a suggestion… 

J: If you're using something that is to be used to refresh his memory…

D: At this point what I am reading is just part of my questions.

J: Thank you.

D: What I am suggesting you reviewed was a brief video news report of an
individual speaking in a video frame lasting one minute “torontogoat aka
Byron Sonne is pretty well known in infosec circles. Holds CISSP, member in
hacklab, arrested the other day in what the media says were plans to pass on
G20 info and blow up the G20. (list of charges). Coworkers say there's no way
he's a terrorist and (something about security theatre), Twitter provocateur
is the extent of his involvement”. Sound familiar?

A: Never seen that video.

D: I'd like to provide you with a copy of the social media report you
prepared… (walks to witness)

D: I'm showing you something… (discussion with crown)

I'd like you to review those and advice if you recognize them as the report
you prepared?

A: Yes.

D: Do you have your own copy?

A: I do.

D: Refer to that.  Starts with… a paragraph or two of writing and all these photos
obtained from open source… website for Flickr account contains 260 items… sep
into 15 pages… what follows are Toronto goat Flickr page… printed 2 per page…
two pages in, some items… photograph of police on university… fence detail,
security camera, tree steps…

A: Yes, yes, yes, yes

D: Drywall plugs…

A: Yes

D: A diagram… adevice that looks like a car jack… queens park… boards with
holes on them… round item, light in color… some contraption, a long white
tube, holes… someone holding something up to the camera… first Canadian place…
antennas… steel wool… four photos of a contraption on a workbench… a fan…
img\_2576… control panel for a microwave… a crystal…  a photo …  . . mumble…
cement with caption 'cable in joint'… Toronto goat Youtube channel…
screencaptures from a video, G20 fence June 15… that's all that's in your
social media report…

A: That's all I was able to save.

D: Nothing in there on Hackernews?

A: No.

D: You understand… that social media are websits that host information for
users?

A: Yes

D: So Flickr… a user uploads a photograph to Flickr and then it'shosted by the
website.

A: Yes

D: So I could use a BlackBerry and upload it to social media website, I could
then deleteie from the BlackBerry and it would still be on the website.

A: Right.

D: It's out there in the 'cloud'.

A: Yes.

D: Twitter… same sort of thing… people make comments on Twitterand they're
accessible on the web.  If I were to make a comment on Twitter on a computer
or mobile device and turned off the computer, the comment is available for
others to see. Because it's public in the web. Right?

A: Right.

D: One doesn't need to leave… it's not as if people accessing the Twitter and
Flickr and somehow accessing my computer in order to see the images or
comments.

A: No.

D: You understand that.

A: Yes.

D: YouTube is the same way?

A: Correct.

D: And you understood that on June 23rd 2010.

A: Yes

D: Do you understand blogs work the same way? The website hosts the
information?

A: Yes.

D: Officer… You understand that in addition to the judicial authorization you
might have received under a search warrant issued under section 47 under the
criminal code… the other powers that you have a police officer to seize items
of interest, for example you arrest someone, you have the power to search for
evidence relating to the offense.

A: Yes.

D: There may be situations under statute where you were authorized to conduct
a search/seizure without judicial authorization.

A: Yes.

D: If there's no time to get a warrant… as long as you have sufficient
grounds…

A: Yes.

D: Another… seizure power is section 49 of the criminal code. (489?)

D: You understand that when you're executing a warrant that you you may be
entitled to seize things that aren't covered by the warrant.

A: Yes

D: Your understanding of the scope of the power to seize things that are not
covered?

A: My interpretation of what is necessary….

D: If something is not listed and you see an item of interest? It has to be
necessary to support the charges?

A: If I believe… I didn't write the warrant… that person might have been less
articulate…  I'm very particular… I felt that this item here was used in the
production of an explosive device…

D: What is the standard that you apply? You see something that is not listed
in the warrant… you don't simply say …

A: It's for the best evidence (?)

D: Do you seize something because you think it might be of assistance to the
investigation.

A: I believe.(?)

J: In terms of the computer I think we have a different rationale…

(judge calls for a 10 minute recess)

D: I was asking questions before the recess about this power to seize things
that aren't covered by warrants and what standards you apply… leaving aside
the standards… am I clear in my understanding that you didn't use the power of
section 49

A: No

D: You believed they were covered by the search warrant.

A: Yes

D: Now… as scene manager is one of your responsibilities to prepare a report
to a justice?

A: No

D: No? I'm showing you something that we've been provided in disclosure… Is
that a document that you prepared?

A: Yes, this a report to a justice.

D: And it says at the top… badge #8307… some boxes to be checked off?

A: Yes.

D: We see on the 3rd page there's a report to a justice… appendix a, under the
heading, seizure with a serch warrant…

A: Yes

D: There's a summary at the bottom describing certain offenses… the accused
Byron Sonne, Kristen Peterson were charged… (continues reading the summary)
Numerous items were seized…

A: Yes

D: That's all under the heading 'seizure with search warrant'

A: Yes

D: If you go to the first page, it says 'I, Officer Manaquis, acted under the
authority of a warrant'?

A: Yes

D: Then we see the checkbox for section 47 of the code…

A: Yes

D: The next box down is not checked, the one that says section 49?

A: No

D: (whispers with crown)

D: (Hands additional copy of something to Judge)

D: The portion that I read out from page 3… going back to the first page…
shown checkboxes.

J: Yes

J: Where's the checkbox for 49?

D: On the left on page 1…

J: Got it.

D: Officer, you're obviously familiar with this document?

A: Yes

D: This document is something you're required to prepare under search and
seizure?

A: Yes

D: Whether you seize it under a search warrant, or 49, or some other power…
you are require to report to a justice? You have to report it if you take
property from a citizen.

A: Yes.

D: In addition this report relates back to the search warrant that you're
executing… part of the order that is made,” you are authorized and required…
to bring before me or some other justice” criminal code allows you to make a
report, instead of physically bringing them.  So by filling out this report
you are complying with part of the order.

A: Correct, Yes, Correct.

D: You understand that when a report is made to a justice, it's not just a
rubber stamp? They could look at the materials and say 'you should give this
back?'

A: Yes

D: Has that ever happened?

A: No.

D: Hold on to things for a period time… have to be under section 49… you have
to request for an item for longer… 

A: Correct

D: Would you agree with me that what you were telling the court that … on the
last page, there's a table of four columns heading 'property tag #' and 'item'
'disposition' and 'charges laid' and on this report, there's only one line
that's been entered, and the tag # is 'see attached list', disposition is
'hold for evidence for court'.

A: Yes.

D: You're telling the court that everything contained in the attached list…
was seized under the search warrant.

A: Yes.

D: You're not suggestiong that you used some other power to seize these items.

A: Correct.

D: There was in fact a list?

A: Yes, it was attached.

D: What I'd like to do is… volume one back from you… and grab volume two…turn
to tab H… there's an item in the document of that tab… it's got a date, dec
31, 2010… you see it's got FIS-JOB14135-0, would you agree that the document
you submitted was as similar list but an earlier version?

A: Yes

D: Take a look… you've got… perhaps we can go… page 16.  There's an 
item, \#101, 'macbook pro', location seized main floor office, date 'June
24th', We then see there's some information about continutity… (reads a bunch
of numbers) “Sealed”.

A: Correct

D: It's clear this isn't the document you provided… item 102, envelope and
letter Canadian association of rocketry…  There are three versions… one is the
date of seizure, and the other is how the items were handled afterwards.

A: Right.

D: Well, If I could direct you to item #100, “extended range WIFI antenna”, a
white column sitting on the desk?

A: Yes.

Did you understand that to have something to do with wireless networking?

A: Yes.

D: Did you understand it to be an electromagnetic data storage device?

A: It was part of a computer.  You use it to access the internet.

D: Did you authorize the seizure of item 100?

A: Yes

D: Is that the extent of what went through your mind?

A: Yes.

D: We continue to page 17… other computer related items…  Apple time capsule… 
an XR-2 hard drive… an Asus mini laptop… all through of those items were
taken out of the office.

J: (asks a question about evidence records, says it's already listed)

D: I can move through it quickly…

J: Is that not listed?

D: The search for data after the items were seized is a second degree statement
of fact… this exhibit list should be read in conjunction with the Albrecht's
statement at preliminary inquiry.

J: I just thought we already had this.

D: Officer these 3 items, 105,106,107… your decision to seize?

A: Yes

D: These could be seized under the warrant?

A: Yes

D: Item 120: Thumb Drives.  Your decision?

A: Yes.

D: Covered by the warrant?

A: Yes.

D: Item 109. Black cover notebook with technical information. Your decision to
seize?

A: Yes

D: What kind of technical information?

A: Far too technical for me to understand.

D: Ok. So fair to say you weren't able to determine if it had anything to do
with explosives?

A: To me it was more something to do with the wave guide… too technical.

D: With an abundance of caution you decided to take it…

A: Reasonable grounds… I believe it was part of the numberous steps to
produce/begin the preduction of explosive device.

D: Your understanding it was covered by the search warrant?

A: To me that's a record.

D: Exibit 122… Embedded web server device. Your decision to seize?

A: Yes.

D: Again, under the warrant?

A: Yes.

D: Item 127 3 SD memory cards. Authorized?

A: Yes

D: Covered?

A: Yes

D: Item 128, electronic jamming device?

A: Yes

D: Did you authorize?

A: Yes

D: Covered?

A: Yes

D: Item 129, periscope in black case. Authorize? Covered?

A: Yes, Yes.

D: Item 138, Macbook in main floor solarium… a laptop computer… 2 computers
now?

A: three.

D: Three, plus a hard drive, thumb drives…

A: Yes.

D: You authorized? Covered?

A: Yes, yes.

D: Item 139, macbook pro, 4th computer, covered. Authorized?

A: Yes, yes.

D: Item 140: Linksys wireless router. That's something related to computer?

A: Yes.

D: On that basis you authorized?

A: Yes

D: Item 142, a modem?

A: Yes.

D: You authorized? Covered?

A: Yes, Yes.

D: Items 143-148, Apple computer, 3 external hard drives, a thumb drive,
another external drive. Authorized? Covered?

A: Yes, Yes.

D: Item 30-6: Canon camera? 30-8 DVD of photos? Authorize?

A: Yes.

D: Digital camera?

A: Yes.

D: Since it was digital it was significant? Why is htat?

A: Yes. The photos that were uploaded on social media. I thought the digital
camera was used to take the photos on the web.

D: Did you authorize?

A: Yes

D: Did you do a cursory review of the photos on the memory card?

A: No.

D: Item 30-8, DVD of photos? Did you review the DVD?

A: Authorized seizure, yes. Review, No.

D: How'd you know what photos were on it?

A: It was an electronics storage device.

D: On that basis, within the warrant?

A: Yes.

D: Let's go back to … one issue…

(Discussion about copies of a paper)

D: Showing you a long-form version of a report. Recognize?

A: Yes.

D: The information… reflect the same information?

A: Correct.

D: The signed version still doesn't have the list… I'm showing you what's been
marked as exhibit 13 B.

It's a photograph of an area in the office…  my friend took you along the
items on the bulletin board, you ID'd one as a map?

A: Yes

D: There's a second document behind the map. Did you seize that document?

A: We seized a lot of documents pertaining to G20.

D: From the photo can you tell what it appears to be…

A: It says 'downtown to become a fortress'…

D: It appears to be an article? Do you recall what website or news that
appears to be from?

A: No.

D: Thank you.

D: Officer just one area of verification… you mentioned something about
scanned… something to do with the delay of moving the computers from
residence… what did the 3D scan involve?

A: it's an investigative tool used at crime scenes, makes a 3D rendering of a
room… someone attends with a fancy machine and puts it in the room and it does
a scan and they can reproduce it on computer.

D: How long did the scan take?

A: it took a few days.

D: While the scan was being done were any items removed?

A: You're in from June 23 to 27, that'swhats authorized?

D: You say the scan took a few days… that's obviously interfering with your
warrant…

A: In regards to the beginning of the scan on the 23rd, we had to wait… for
personnel from FIS, he had to get an assistance… the he began scanning just
after 5pm. He wasn't able to finish that day. But he did do the scene scan in
stages, he did it in certain chunks so we can follow with the search after
him.

D: At what point… the computers were seized on June 24th… do you know the time
they came to seize the computers?

A: 2:40 PM.

D: And by 5:45pm they had finished their collection? And that's on June 24th,
still 3 days left?

A: Yes

D: A decision was made to remove the computers rather than search them in the
house?

A: Yes.

D: Officer… thank you very much…. In your evidence, my friend was asking you…
the reasons you thought the computers were significant.  One of the first
things you said was that it had something to do with explosives?

A: Yes. Documentation.

D: Do you recall giving that answer before we even mentioned the social media
blogs?

A: I can't recall.

D: We prepared a will-say, recently?

A: Nov 14.

D: Were you provided with a list of questions?

A: No.

D: You were asked to just best recall your involvement?

A: Yes

D: Anyhting specific about computers?

A: No

D: Do you have the will-say with you?

A: Yes.

D: I'm going to suggest to you that you describe the reasons for the seizure
… you make no mention of the explosives. Correct?

A: Uh… No I just say it's to support the charges.

D: No, you say more than that, you make a reference to social media and
Toronto goat blog…

A: Used to store the Toronto goat blog…

D: Right.  I take it when you were preparing this will-say it was to be given
to the defense?

A: Yes.

D: And you were trying to reconstruct what was going through your mind?

A: Yes

D: And the issue of explosives was in your head?

A: They were all in my head… with relation to computers… 

D: One more thing, this issue of Hacker News… you didn't print off anything
about Hacker News?

A: No

D: Since the early morning hours of June 23rd, had you gone back to
Hacker News?

A: No

D: Have you reviewed any of the Flickr or Twitter if there are links to
Hacker News?

A: It usually goes the other way.

D: So Hacker News puts links to other things?

A: It's a website… just have to keep looking.

D: So you haven't gone back to the website in a year and a half?

A: No.

D: So all we have is your recollection? You agree that your recollection is
imprecise?

A: No, you mentioned a video that was about him being arrested…

D: In terms of what was on the site when he was arrested…

A: I remember a bunch of tabs and clicking around… but when I did my search,
the things that were really important to me were the photos… I couldn't remember
how to get back to the Hacker News blog… it's so many layers.

D: Thank you very much officer.

CROWN REBUTTAL

C: Mr. Copeland asked you about your report to the justice? You believed your
authority was to seize things?

A: Correct.

C: In your experience have you ever filed separate returns have you filed
separate returns based on section 49?

A: No

C: Mr. Copeland also asked you about the information being stored out in
'outer space'?

C: What was your understanding in June of 2010 as to whether or not there
would be a trace? That might or might not be recorded on my computer?

A: I believe that it's going to be recorded on your computer… pictures would
be on my computer… I don't delete something…

C: Copeland referred you to your social media report? Do you have that in hand
now?

A: Yes

C: There's a number of pictures on there of things posted on Flickr?

A: Yes

C: Can you tell me if there's things in there posted that you saw in the
actual house?

A: Yes, I saw the pneumatic jack for lifting a car… the pieces… components of
the tube device… I recall seeing parts of the device that is put together that
had a big aluminum barrel… and a microwave… the faceplate of a microwave… not
this crystal specifically, but crystals… and… that's pretty much it.

C: My final question: My friend asked you about digital cameras or video
camreas, did you or anyone on your search team review pictures on the camera
at the site?

A: I didn't.

C: Did anyone on your team?

A: No.

C: Thanks very much.

J: Shut down quickly, 10 AM Monday morning.  I'd like to ask counsel to
consider… if there's any issue that's arisen that's going to affect the timing
of the trial…

